Zktls (#94)
tlsnotary/docs-mdbook: blogs/202408/zktls.md

Before we dive deeper into TLSNotary, let’s first recap TLS itself.

**TLS (Transport Layer Security)** is the protocol that underpins much of the secure communication on the internet. It is the “s” in https. TLS ensures that data sent between a client and server is encrypted and remains private. However, unless the data is cryptographically signed at the source, traditional TLS doesn’t offer a straightforward way to prove to a third party what data was exchanged.

![Overview](./overview1.svg)

**TLSNotary** is a tool designed to solve this problem by implementing an **MPC-TLS (Multi-Party Computation TLS)** protocol. In TLSNotary, two parties—a Prover and a Verifier—cooperate to establish a TLS connection and retrieve authenticated data from a server. Through this collaboration, both parties receive cryptographic guarantees about the data’s authenticity and integrity. On the server’s side, this looks like a normal TLS session. TLSNotary also protects the privacy of the Prover (aka the "user"), but that is beyond the scope of this blog post.

> But what if a fourth or fifth party wants to verify the TLS session? They could repeat the process above to obtain their own cryptographic guarantees. However, in many cases, it’s more practical to delegate the TLS verification to a trusted party and rely on their attestations.

Reviewer: Perhaps Im not caffeinated enough, but it took me a few read-thtoughs of this paragraph. May I suggest being a bit more verbose here.
If we highlight the word data like `data`, then it is clear that in this paragraph we talk about the `data` from the prev. paragraph.
```suggestion
But can an external party **trustlessly** verify the `data` from a TLS connection mentioned above? No, they can't. Their only option is to act as a Verifier in the TLSNotary protocol to obtain their own cryptographic guarantees. However, in many cases, it’s more practical to delegate the (Note to reviewers: removing `TLS` to avoid an unnecessary detail in favor of simplicity of the exposition) verification to a trusted party and rely on their attestations.
```

## Proofs vs. Attestations

When we talk about **proofs** in cryptography, we usually refer to something that is **publicly verifiable**—anyone with the proof can independently verify its validity without needing additional information. Publicly verifiable proofs are often associated with zk-SNARKs and allow anyone to verify the proof without needing to trust any specific party. These systems are highly desirable but unfortunately not always feasible.

**Designated verifier** systems delegate verification to one verifier (or a coordinated group of verifiers). After successful verification, a verifier can **attest** to the data for other parties by issuing a signed **attestation**. This approach requires trust in the designated verifier’s integrity.

![Overview](./overview2.svg)

In the case of MPC-TLS, the Verifier knows the TLS session was authentic, so it can attest to it. However, the result is not something that everyone can independently verify without trust in the Verifier.

> **Remark:** In the TLSNotary source code, the lines between a proof and an attestation can seem confusing. While TLSNotary generates something that is a proof to the Verifier, to anyone else, it is an attestation.

Reviewer: I wanted to unpack this sentence. But also my changes are only accurate from a high level pov. In the actual code, the Prover sends commitments to the Notary and the Notary attests to those commitments + adds some additional info to the attestation. 
So, I sacrificed a bit of accuracy for the sake of giving a better mental image. It's a trade-off, feel free to not include this if you think this adds more confusion than clarity.

```suggestion
**Remark:** In the TLSNotary source code, the lines between a proof and an attestation can seem confusing. It is useful to have the following mental model. First, a Prover generates a proof to prove statements about the TLS connection data to a Verifier. Then, based on that proof, the Verifier issues an attestation.
```

## Onchain Attestations

> The Verifier cannot operate onchain, as it must be online simultaneously with both the Prover and the Server. However, the TLSNotary result can still be utilized onchain if the Verifier signs the output as an attestation. This attestation, however, is not a publicly verifiable proof. Since a Verifier could potentially sign anything, consumers of this information must trust the Verifier. While TLSNotary can be used to build oracles, it does not solve the **oracle problem**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the need to maintain a secret state and also due to high blockchain latency, it is currently not feasible for the Verifier to operate onchain, as it must be online simultaneously with both the Prover and the Server. However, the TLSNotary result can still be utilized onchain if the Verifier signs the output as an attestation. This attestation, however, is not a publicly verifiable proof. Since a Verifier could potentially sign anything, consumers of this information must trust the Verifier. While TLSNotary can be used to build oracles, it does not solve the **oracle problem**.
```

## MPC or ZK? What’s the Difference?

**MPC (Multi-Party Computation)** and **ZK (Zero-Knowledge)** are two cryptographic techniques often mentioned together, but they serve different purposes.

**MPC** allows multiple parties to jointly compute a function over their inputs while keeping those inputs private. In the context of TLSNotary, MPC is used to perform a TLS handshake so both the Prover and the Verifier each have a key share. They need to cooperate to encrypt requests and decrypt responses with TLS's symmetric encryption. Through this collaboration, both parties receive cryptographic guarantees about the data’s authenticity and integrity. Additionally, during the MPC-TLS process, the Verifier only sees encrypted information, thus protecting the user’s privacy.

**ZK proofs** enable one party to prove to another that a statement is true without revealing any other information. Prefixing "zk" to a term is fashionable nowadays; however, **zkTLS** as a term is a misnomer. **True zero-knowledge proofs of TLS sessions are not feasible today**—TLS relies on interactive, stateful communication, which is too complex to fit into zk circuits.

> TLSNotary uses ZK technology, but the main driver is MPC.

Reviewer 2: this sentence is a little confusing for me, i think your MPC usage is well described already.

## Attestations vs. Proofs

When we talk about **proofs** in cryptography, we usually refer to something that is **publicly verifiable**; anyone with the proof can independently verify its validity without needing additional information. This is the strength of zero-knowledge proofs in general: they are self-contained and can be verified by anyone, anywhere.

On the other hand, an **attestation** is a statement made by one party to another about something that has occurred, and it often requires some level of trust in the party making the statement. In the case of MPC-TLS, the Verifier knows the TLS session was authentic, so it can attest to it. But the result is not something that everyone can independently verify without trust in the Verifier.

**Remark:** In the TLSNotary source code, the lines between a proof and an attestation blur. While the process generates something that is a proof to the Verifier, to anyone else, it is an attestation; they have to trust the Verifier’s claim about what happened.

## Onchain Attestations

> When dealing with blockchain and onchain attestations, the Verifier cannot run onchain. This means that the attestation put onchain by the Prover (or the Verifier) is not a standalone proof but an attestation. Consumers of this information need to trust that there wasn't any collusion between the Prover and Verifier. TLSNotary can be used to build oracles, but it does not solve the **oracle problem**.

Reviewer 2: would be nice to know if any plan to address this, or alternative thinking..etc.

maybe its a research topic which we don't have answer yet, but could mention it here instead of saying, no solution yet. not 100% confident of what I'm saying.

## Conclusion

> In the end, terminology matters because it shapes our understanding and expectations of the technology we use. The term zkTLS might sound appealing, but it is inaccurate. TLS sessions are not proven using zero-knowledge proofs. Instead, TLSNotary favors the term **MPC-TLS attestations**.

Reviewer 2: its inaccurate "and misleading the potential which TLSNotary really unlock to the ....." can add more here, to address the MPC potential, and why matter here.
